adding final changes (#186)
aiidateam/aiida-website: src/blog/gsoc-2026-aiida-natural-language.md

In addition, tests that run the whole architecture for a real calculation from end to end are still missing.
That is what the next two weeks are for.

---

## Weeks 11 & 12: hardening what exists

### A read-only role is not a sandbox

The codegen sandbox shipped in week 10 as a second profile pointing at the same database, through a PostgreSQL role with no write privilege.

> The reasoning was that a scratch database would be safer and useless, because an empty one cannot answer "which structures did I relax last month".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reasoning was that an empty scratch database, while safer, would be useless, as it cannot answer any questions about the real data.
```

> Then mentor deleted the sandbox profile, agreed when `verdi` asked whether to delete its data, and lost his own database.

Reviewer: Just mention the danger in general, not explicitly what happened: 
If the sandbox creates a new AiiDA profile, as a user, one would assume that this profile can be safely deleted, without touching any of the other profiles. But, as the storage was shared, and the sandbox only enforced by the read-only role on the SQL db, that was not true, and that's why deleting the sandbox profile could delete the actual, real storage of the profile, from which the sandbox was created.

The read-only role was never the weak point.
The destructive command is run by the user, as themselves, against a profile they had been told was disposable, and no database privilege stands between a person and `verdi profile delete`.
What I had got wrong was upstream of the implementation: I framed the choice as shared-storage versus empty, and a copy is neither.

> The sandbox is now a disposable copy of the user's storage, with one rule expressed as a single function that asks whether deleting one profile's data would destroy another's.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's why now, the sandbox is a disposable copy of the user's profile storage, with one rule expressed as a single function that asks whether deleting one profile's data would destroy another's.
```

It fails closed, so a backend the code cannot reason about counts as sharing.
`init` refuses to register a sandbox that shares storage, `check` fails on one, `teardown` refuses to delete one, and `doctor` reports it, all through that one implementation ([aiida-agents#85](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/85), closing [#73](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/73)).

> The layers above it are not containment and are documented as such.

Reviewer: containment in what sense?

A batch resubmission promised in its docstring to be all-or-nothing and was not: a spec that failed validation halfway through left the earlier members already submitted.
It now validates every member before submitting any, and a failure during the run phase reports which pks did go out ([aiida-agents#86](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/86)).

The root options only worked before the subcommand, so `aiida-agents ask -a analysis "..."` failed while `aiida-agents -a analysis ask "..."` worked, for no reason a user could infer ([aiida-agents#88](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/88)).

For each of these I reverted the fix after writing the test and confirmed the test failed.
Two of them had tests written against real transcripts that still passed with the bug present, which is why the convention exists.

### Dependencies, and CI going red everywhere

Every open pull request went red at once, and none of them had caused it.
The package depended on an unpinned `aiida-core` git branch, which had moved to a 3.0 development version that conflicted with `aiida-pseudo`'s cap.

> I pinned it ([aiida-agents#89](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/89)), and once `aiida-core` 2.9 was released project was moved onto the released version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I pinned it ([aiida-agents#89](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/89)), and once `aiida-core` 2.9 was released, the project was moved onto the released version.
```

Could be interesting to expand a bit here: the issue came from us working from `main`, to have access to some of the unrelated features. Now, once we actually released v2.9.0, we bumped the version to `3.0.dev0`, as that is what we would now like to work towards to, upstream, in `aiida-core`. We did not think much of it, but then realized these issues, e.g., here, and in other repos. It's really, once you don't work off of just a bunch of stable and released dependencies, that such cases can occur (and this is what we are doing here in the project).

I nearly shipped a silent regression here.
An override I added dropped Sphinx and fifty other packages from the lock file, which I caught only because the pull request's diff summary said 883 deletions on what should have been a two-file change.

---

## Final report

_This is the closing report for the Google Summer of Code 2026 project described throughout this post._
_The sections above are the running log written fortnightly as the work happened; this one summarises what shipped, what did not, and what is left for whoever picks it up._

**Project:** a natural-language, multi-agent interface to [AiiDA](https://www.aiida.net/)
**Code:** [github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents)

> **My contributions:** [all 58 pull requests](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B) · [the 51 that merged](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B+is%3Amerged) · [my commits on `main`](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/commits/main?author=Jaweria-B)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**My contributions:** [58 pull requests](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B) · [the 51 that merged](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B+is%3Amerged) · [my commits on `main`](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/commits/main?author=Jaweria-B)
```
Otherwise it reads as if there have been only those 58 PRs on the repo at all.

> **Mentor:** [Julian Geiger](https://github.com/GeigerJ2)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Mentor:** [Julian Geiger](https://github.com/GeigerJ2), [Edan Bainglass](https://github.com/edan-bainglass)
```

> **Mentor:** [Julian Geiger](https://github.com/GeigerJ2)

Reviewer: Astro's markdown pipeline has no `remark-breaks`, and `src/styles/blog.css` sets no `white-space: pre-line` on `.blog-post-content p`, so a single newline inside a paragraph is just whitespace. This block is meant to be read as four labelled fields (I suppose) but renders as one run-on line.

```suggestion
- **Project:** a natural-language, multi-agent interface to [AiiDA](https://www.aiida.net/)
- **Code:** [github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents)
- **My contributions:** [58 pull requests](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B) · [the 51 that merged](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B+is%3Amerged) · [my commits on `main`](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/commits/main?author=Jaweria-B)
- **Mentors:** [Julian Geiger](https://github.com/GeigerJ2), [Edan Bainglass](https://github.com/edan-bainglass)

### The problem

AiiDA records every calculation a researcher runs and how each one connects to the others, which makes it possible to ask precise questions about a body of work.

> Asking them means knowing which of several dozen `verdi` commands to reach for, and often chaining four or five together.

Reviewer: Using the Python API is of course the other option, but, that, in turn, requires to know the Python API. It's generally not too much to ask from users, if they use a Python library, to learn how the Python library works, but, still, especially for newcomers, it's always good to make things simpler, and, being able to interact with the tool via natural language, is of course simpler.

> "Why did this calculation fail?" is a five-step investigation that assumes you already know the five steps exist.

Reviewer: Not sure where the 5 steps come from? If one knows about `verdi process report`, they could just run that with the process PK, and get the answer. It really depends. I'd just drop that sentence, it's too sensational and too concrete.

This project is a natural-language interface that answers those questions and, with confirmation, acts on them.

### What was built

A planner reads the request and names which specialist handles it, in what order, up to three steps.
It holds no tools of its own, so the component that decides what to do cannot touch the database.

Three specialists do the work.
**Analysis** explores the provenance graph and reads the documentation, and has no write tool at all.
**Execution** discovers installed workflows, inspects their input schemas, builds inputs from a protocol builder, and submits, with every write behind an approval prompt.

> **Codegen** writes Python for questions no fixed tool expresses, runs it, and reports what it returned.

Reviewer: I think this is a good and sensible final distribution of work, these 3 sub-agents.

Three guarantees hold underneath.
Nothing is written without confirmation, and the gate lives on the tool rather than in the prompt, so no phrasing talks it out of asking.
Nothing is quoted that no tool produced: every reply is scanned afterwards for quantities that appear in no tool output, because the prompt-level version of the same rule was ignored in five test runs out of five.

> Generated code runs against a disposable copy of the storage, never the researcher's own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generated code runs against a disposable copy of the user's AiiDA profile storage, never the researcher's own production data.
```

The same tool layer is served over MCP for any compatible client, with the write tools deliberately absent, because a generic client has no approval gate.

> Plugins extend all of this through one entry point, contributing tools, documentation corpora, and prompt fragments without this package ever importing theirs.

Reviewer: Mention that this is how we imagine it to work in the future. Currently, we don't have it in place for any of the existing domain-specific AiiDA plugins.

### What got merged

> **[51 of my 58 pull requests](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B+is%3Amerged)**, making up **56 of the 72 commits** on `main`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[51 of my 58 pull requests](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3AJaweria-B+is%3Amerged)**, making up **56 commits** on `main`.
```

As we're still working on it right now, this number will drift.

> The tree carries 1066 tests, runs strict typing across Python 3.10 to 3.14, and documents its design in eleven decision records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tree carries 1066 tests, runs strict typing across Python 3.10 to 3.14, and documents its design in eleven Architectural Decision Records (ADRs).
```

By area:

- **Tool layer and MCP server** — the read-only surface over AiiDA's API, served both to the agents and to external MCP clients ([#2](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/2), [#18](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/18), [#28](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/28))
- **Analysis agent** — provenance queries, process reports, retrieved-file reading, and failure diagnosis that walks from a work chain's exit code down to the calculation that actually broke ([#4](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/4), [#35](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/35), [#43](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/43), [#53](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/53))
- **RAG over the AiiDA documentation** — local embeddings, fenced corpora, atomic indexing, and citations that link to the page the answer came from ([#5](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/5), [#23](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/23), [#34](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/34), [#61](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/61))

> - **Execution agent and the approval gate** — workflow discovery, schema introspection, protocol and spec-driven input building, cutoff range checks, sequential runs, and batch resubmission under a single approval ([#8](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/8), [#29](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/29), [#36](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/36), [#52](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/52), [#54](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/54), [#56](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/56), [#57](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/57))

Reviewer: ```markdown
- **Tool layer and MCP server** — … ([#2](…/pull/2), [#18](…), [#28](…))
- **Execution agent and the approval gate** — … ([#8](…), [#29](…/pull/29), [#36](…), …)
```

```markdown
Five were early iterations superseded by reworked versions that landed instead: the first MCP tools ([#2](…)), … and a first Execution agent ([#29](…)) rebuilt around the approval primitive.
```

Both are cited as merged work in a section headed "What got merged" and then, twelve lines later, as work that did not merge. The second reading is the correct one.

Drop `#2` from the tool-layer bullet and `#29` from the execution bullet. The rest of both bullets is fine: `#18`/`#28` and `#8`/`#36`/`#52`/`#54`/`#56`/`#57` all merged. The superseding PRs are already in the lists (`#28` carries the same title as `#26`), so nothing is lost by removing them.

Everything else in the numbering checks out: 58 authored, 51 merged, 7 closed-unmerged, 0 still open, and the "five + one + one" breakdown in "What did not get merged" sums correctly. Every one of the 56 links in the diff resolves, and every `/issues/N` vs `/pull/N` path matches the actual object type.

### What did not get merged

Seven pull requests closed without merging, and none were rejected on their merits.

Five were early iterations superseded by reworked versions that landed instead: the first MCP tools ([#2](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/2)), two passes at the generic query tool ([#25](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/25), [#26](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/26)), a standalone diagnostic agent ([#17](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/17)) that became a tool on the Analysis agent rather than a fourth specialist, and a first Execution agent ([#29](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/29)) rebuilt around the approval primitive.
One ([#92](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/92)) was overtaken by my mentor's equivalent change once `aiida-core` 2.9 was released.
One ([#70](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/pull/70)) was folded into a later pull request.

One piece of finished work is not yet open as a pull request: folding `check` and `warm` into a single `doctor` command with `--only` and `--warm` flags ([#75](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/75)).

> It waits on a related change of my mentor's that touches the same command.

Reviewer: Currently still trying to get this merged. I'd say we can drop this for now.

### What is left to do

> The gap I would close first is **an end-to-end test against a real DFT calculation**.

Reviewer: We should still actually do that before the seminar. Something I'm also looking into right now. Of course, this is much more complex to set up, as it requires: HPC access, a compiled binary on the HPC, Compute resources on the HPC, everything registered and set up in AiiDA itself. This is at least for submission. Still, it would be nice if we could go run through a full real workflow, at least before the seminar. I'll try that out with a local compiled Quantum ESPRESSO binary, for a relaxation workchain.

The unit suite covers the plumbing thoroughly, and cannot tell anyone whether a generated query returns what a researcher expected.

Beyond that, in the repository's open issues:

> - **OS-level isolation for generated code** — the copy protects the database; the filesystem and network are narrowed but not closed

Reviewer: They are not even narrowed, no? There is no isolation in that sense, whatsoever.

> - **Onboarding** ([#83](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/83)) — a fresh profile needs a computer, a code, a plugin and pseudopotentials, and the agent correctly asks for all of them without being able to provide any

Reviewer: Just a note, this is more of a meta issue, not really something concrete.

> - **Serving RAG and plugin tools over MCP** ([#84](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/84)) — an MCP client currently gets ungrounded answers because the doc-search tool is not registered there

Reviewer: I'd just say the RAG serving is open, no? Our own tools can be exposed via MCP. And, for external plugins, we don't even have any tools there, so, I'd say exposing them (that is, non-existing tools) is not the actually the gap. I'd just mention RAG serving here in this bullet point.

> - **Moving the grounding vocabulary to a plugin hook** ([#80](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/80)) — units and parameter names are DFT-specific and should not live in a generic package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Moving the grounding vocabulary to domain-specific plugins** ([#80](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/80)) — units and parameter names are DFT-specific and should not live in a generic package
```

- **Restoring token streaming** ([#78](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/78)) — lost when the approval gate landed, and it has to compose with the deferred-tool output type

> - **Consolidating the agent builders** ([#77](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents/issues/77)) — a mechanical refactor that would put two safety invariants in one place instead of three

Reviewer: Hm, that should actually be quick to do? Maybe you or I still manage it?

> - **Plugin tools reaching the Execution agent** — today a plugin can only contribute to Analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Plugin tools reaching the other agents** — today a plugin can only contribute to Analysis
```
Hm, interesting, I was not even aware of that. Any agent-related functionality in plugins should of course be possible to be piped into all of the agents.

### Trying it, and building on it

```bash
pip install "aiida-agents[rag] @ git+https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-agents.git"
aiida-agents doctor      # every subsystem, and the command that fixes each failure
aiida-agents rag build
aiida-agents chat

> ```

Reviewer: People would also need to configure it, so I'd also show `aiida-agents config init`, no? 
Not sure how much you want to show here. But, I think it's OK. Really running anything anyway either requires an API key for any of the cloud providers, or Ollama running locally, with models pulled, etc., so, it requires a bit of setup.
